Stateless Ingress node firewall support using eBPF proposal (#1158)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/network/ingress-node/ingress-node-firewall-with-ebpf.md

- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

OCP customers would like to secure OCP's nodes from external attacks by configuring ingress firewall policies.
eBPF provides a very flexible filtering mechanism to allow early detection and filtering.
eXpress Data Path (XDP) is a feature in the Linux kernel which allows users to execute a user-supplied eBPF program when a packet is received on a network interface (NIC). 
This program is executed in the NIC’s device driver, right after the interrupt processing and before the network stack. 
The goal of XDP is to offer comparable performance to kernel bypass solutions while working with the existing kernel networking stack.
A new cluster-scoped object `IngressNodeFirewall` will be used to configure node ingress firewall match rules and per rule statistics will be avaliable.
Admin can provision multiple instances of this object while ensuring certain execution order.

> For the best performance XDP programs need to attach to interfaces using the following models:

Reviewer: FWIW, the kernel network team has (belatedly) suggested that we shouldn't even use XDP if the NIC doesn't support native XDP...

Author: the prob with NIC doesn't support XDP performance will just degrade become as slow as doing skb kernel processing so going from MPPS to KPPS but that is expected and explainable

- Native XDP \
  The XDP program is loaded by the network card driver as part of its initial receive path. This also requires support from the network card driver.
- Offloaded XDP \
  The XDP program loads directly on the NIC, and executes without using the CPU. This also requires support from the network interface device.

## Motivation

Customers would like to secure OCP cluster from external attacks.

### Goals

- Flexible match filter rules for customers to use with a CRD validation to detect and reject invalid configuration.
- Provide a mechanism for customers to select which nodes via `nodeSelector`.
- Provide a mechanism to define attachment interfaces for the node ingress firewall objects.  
- Ingress node firewall is deployed on a fully operational OCP cluster (i.e. Ingress node firewall is deployed as a day 2 operation and is not enabled by default at the cluster install time).
- fail safe in case of user provisioned invalid rules which can lockup cluster operation.

### Non-Goals
- Stateful support
- Flood Attacks

## Proposal

- customers will label nodes where ingress node policy will be deployed on.

> - customers will deploy daemonSet controller on all the selected nodes by applying `IngressNodeFirewallConfig` object. 

Reviewer: Why is this needed? Why can't CNO (or whatever it is that processes the IngressNodeFirewallConfig object) deploy the daemonset to the correct nodes automatically?

Reviewer: why do you need flexibility? It needs to run on exactly the nodes that have firewall rules doesn't it?

Reviewer: > this makes the code simpler

But it makes the user's life more complicated. And it makes the feature less secure; you could write firewall rules and think they were in effect and not realize that they were only in effect on some nodes but not others.

Author: all objs have status so u can tell I prefer being explicit stable ds before getting into applying rule to make life easier for all. at this point we can see what will be the customer experience feedback since this is now dev preview

- customers will prepare `IngressNodeFirewall` objects with all required firewall rules and interfaces the ebpf program will be attached to.
- IngressNodeFW controller will process `IngressNodeFirewall` objects, verification webhook will make sure configuration doesn't contradict with fail safe rules.
- Ingress node firewall daemon will watch ingress node firewall objects and create `nodeState` object which contains all rules objects that is applied to specific node then load eBPF map table and attach eBPF kernel hook loaded as `BPF_PROG_TYPE_XDP` to the list of interfaces configured in the object.

> - in order to fail safe and avoid cluster lockup, various pinholes will be open in the firewall to allow basic services.

Reviewer: (I don't want to reply inside a resolved comment since it will get lost, but @astoycos had asked "Are these explicitly defined by the cluster admin? Or is it done internally in OCP whenever a new object is created?")

There was some debate about whether/how much we should have these, vs being 100% pro-shooting-yourself-in-the-foot.

Maybe a future update to this could have the failsafes also defined by a CRD (with an admission controller ensuring that it always contains a few specific rules, like allowing all the masters to talk to each other on the etcd and apiserver ports).

Then to screw things up you'd have to first accidentally remove the failsafes, and then accidentally create rules that blocked ssh, etc

Author: we could look at making failsafe a CRD for future release but the prog if that goes wrong we will go back to square 1 and lockup the cluster honestly don't see much benifit atm making them CRD

### Workflow Description

- the following diagram shows how node ingress firewall configuration is handled

![Ingress Firewall configuration processing](./ingress-nodefw-config-flow.png)

> - the following diagram shows eBPF how ingress firewall kernel hook will process packets and apply firewall rules

Reviewer: (Miciah's comment got "thumbs up"-ed and marked resolved but was not actually addressed)

Author: which one r u referring to ?

Reviewer: there was a comment on this line fixing up the mangled syntax of the sentence

> ![eBPF workflow](./ebpf-packet-flow.png)

Reviewer: ugggh... "everything is accepted by default, except if you create an IngressNodeFirewall in which case everything is rejected by default" is a terrible semantic. This is how NetworkPolicy works and it's literally the worst problem with NetworkPolicy.

IngressNodeFirewall allows the admin to explicitly say "and reject everything else". If that's the semantic they want, then they should say that explicitly.

Reviewer: In particular, IngressNodeFirewall is designed so that you can have multiple INF objects. But the "if there are any INFs then default deny" rule means that INFs don't compose correctly. Especially:
1. You can't create a new IngressNetworkFirewall object if you don't know whether or not there are other existing IngressNetworkFirewall objects. Creating an object that says "Deny access to port 999" could end up meaning either "deny access to port 999" or "deny access to literally everything except the failsafe stuff".
2. You can't work around that by doing "high-priority deny access to port 999, else low-priority allow access to everything", because the cluster might otherwise be depending on the default-deny-everything rule and then you'd break that.

Author: we felt we have to move from what we have today were we will let everything to the cluster , to select if we need to drop very specific patterns while keep the default to allow and that is indeed will be very clear in our doc. and ofcourse up to improvement as we get more feedback

Reviewer: Regardless of what we want the default behavior to be or what customers want the default behavior to be, having the default behavior _change_ when you create the first IngressNodeFirewall is bad and makes the feature confusing and difficult to work with.

If someone wants "everything else is blocked", then they can just create a rule with a very high `order` matching all traffic and denying it. We can even provide an example of this in the documentation for them to comment.

Author: so is this what u recommend we doc if someone wanted to default to drop set the a rule with early order to drop all ? at least if he encounter critical service drops he will need to fine tune his rule ?

Reviewer: I don't care where the "else drop all" comes from, as long as it is _explicit_ somewhere. The user could have to specify it in details themselves, or there could be a special rule type for it, or there could be a second CRD where you set a flag saying "I want default deny behavior". But it should not just happen automatically any time the number of IngressNodeFirewalls changes from 0 to 1.

Author: I prefer to leave it to customer to explicitly specify it for themselves. so they are in control of the behavior.

- the following table shows sample of fail safe rules to make sure users won't block basic cluster services by configuring invalid firewall rules

| Source CIDR | Protocol | Port | Purpose |
|-------------|----------|------|---------|
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    |  22  |  SSH    |
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   UDP    |  68  | DHCP    |
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    | 6443 | Kubernetes API server access |

> |  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    | 2380 & 2379 | Etcd access |

Reviewer: What exactly does this block? Literally exactly those rules? Can I make one rule that blocks SSH access from 0.0.0.0/1 and one that blocks it from 128.0.0.0/1? Can I make a rule that blocks ports 6442-6444 from 0.0.0.0/0?

Author: just show sample of the fail safe rules , and we have webhook in place to prevent overwrite those rules

Reviewer: I mean, what do these rules actually mean? What are we actually blocking? It's impossible to know if these are reasonable default without knowing exactly what these rules mean.

Author: those rules are set of TCP and UDP ports that customer can't set firewall rules against to keep cluster functionality and we block the user from doing that for example if user attempts to deny TCP using api server port
https://redhat.enterprise.slack.com/files/U01QY8P5YHX/F040RG16DJP/image.png

Reviewer: Yes, I know they're a set of rules, but what **_EXACTLY_** do they mean?

For example, if I write a rule saying "block traffic from 0.0.0.0/0 to all ports", then does that (a) get rejected by the admission controller because it would violate all four of the rules written above? (b) get accepted and result in all traffic being blocked except for 0.0.0.0/0 to TCP 22, 0.0.0.0/0 to UDP 68, 0.0.0.0/0 to TCP 6443, 0.0.0.0/0 to TCP 2379, and 0.0.0.0/0 to TCP 2380? (c) get accepted and result in all traffic being blocked to all ports, because none of those 4 rules appears verbatim in the firewall rule?

Reviewer: (link doesn't work for me btw)

Author: yeah (a) it get rejected because it attempt to overwrite those rules.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

A new downstream OLM operator (openshift/ingress-nodefw-operator) will be designed to do the following:
- Create Ingress node firewall config object to deploy daemonSet.
- Create the CRDs for the new object.
- controller for each of the new resources to handle add/update/delete
- verification webhook to validate the configuration and enforce failSafe rules.
- library to construct and load eBPF ingress maps tables based on the provisioned rules.
- library for statistics collection and exporting to prometheus.
- library for bpf perf event reporting.
- library for FailSafe rules handling.
- library to sync eBPF rules and update rules in eBPF maps.

New downstream repo for the kernel hook implementation (openshift/ingress-node-firewall)
- sample `IngressNodeConfig` object
  
```yaml
apiVersion: ingressnodefirewall.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: IngressNodeFirewallConfig
metadata:
  name: ingressnodefirewallconfig
  namespace: ingress-node-firewall-system
spec:
  nodeSelector:
    node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
  tolerations:
  - key: "Example"
    operator: "Exists"

>     effect: "NoExecute"

Reviewer: (As above, I don't think we should have the `IngressNodeFirewallConfig`, but if we do then you shouldn't have to manually specify `tolerations` in it.)

Author: can u explain what is the prob setting toleration for it ?

Reviewer: Setting tolerations on the DaemonSet is fine, I'm just saying that we should do that _automatically_ rather than requiring the user to do it explicitly.

Reviewer: In that case they don't want the software to be able to run on every node, so they allow the admin to clarify which kinds of nodes the software can run on and which ones it can't. In our case, if there are firewall rules that apply to the node, and there is any software running on that node at all, then the daemon _must_ run on that node.

Author: should i dropped from the config object then ?

```

- sample `IngressNodeFirewall` object

```yaml
apiVersion: ingressnodefirewall.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: IngressNodeFirewall
metadata:
  name: ingressnodefirewall-demo-1
spec:
  interfaces:
  - eth0
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      do-node-ingress-firewall: 'true'
  ingress:
  - sourceCIDRs:
       - 1.1.1.1/24
       - 100:1::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocolConfig:
        protocol: TCP
        tcp:
          ports: "100-200"
      action: Allow
    - order: 20
      protocolConfig:
        protocol: UDP
        udp:
          ports: 8000
      action: Allow
  - sourceCIDRs:
       - 3.3.3.3/24
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocolConfig:
        protocol: ICMP
        icmp:
          icmpType: 3 # Destination unreachable
          icmpCode: 1 # Host unreachable
      action: Allow
  - sourceCIDRs:
       - 10:10::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocolConfig:
        protocol: ICMPv6
        icmpv6:
          icmpType: 128 # Ping request
      action: Deny
  - sourceCIDRs:
       - 0.0.0.0/0
       - 0::0/0
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocolConfig:
        protocol: TCP
      action: Allow
```

> In the case that there are multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` objects for the same nodes and interfaces with overlapoing CIDRs, the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be executed first and once the rule is executed and an action is taken, the firewall operation will be completed, and all the following rules won't be checked. 

Author: ruleId is granuteed to be unique by the API definition 
```
// rules is a list of per protocol ingress node firewall rules.
	// +listType:=map
	// +listMapKey:=order
``` 
and we do have verification webhook as another line of defense

> In the case that there are multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` objects for the same nodes and interfaces with overlapoing CIDRs, the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be executed first and once the rule is executed and an action is taken, the firewall operation will be completed, and all the following rules won't be checked. 

Reviewer 2: ACK so maybe just add a note to the enhancement saying "no two ignfw's may have the same order"

> In the case that there are multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` objects for the same nodes and interfaces with overlapping CIDRs, the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be executed first and once the rule is executed and an action is taken, the firewall operation will be completed, and all the following rules won't be checked. 

Reviewer: In the example above, all of the rules have `order: 10`... what does that mean? Is that even valid?

Author: different cidr can allow to use same order rule if u want within the same cidr the order has to be unique

- eBPF data structures and types

https://github.com/openshift/ingress-node-firewall/blob/master/bpf/ingress_node_firewall.h

- eBPF statistics sample

```shell
curl 127.0.0.01:39301/metrics | grep -i "ingressnodefirewall_node"

ingressnodefirewall_node_packet_allow_bytes 0

ingressnodefirewall_node_packet_allow_total 0

ingressnodefirewall_node_packet_deny_bytes 490

ingressnodefirewall_node_packet_deny_total 5
```

- eBPF drop events example

```shell
2022-08-19 16:55:08 +0000 UTC kind-worker2 ruleId 10 action Drop len 98 if eth0

2022-08-19 16:55:08 +0000 UTC kind-worker2 	ipv4 src addr 172.18.0.1 dst addr 172.18.0.4

2022-08-19 16:55:08 +0000 UTC kind-worker2 	icmpv4 type 8 code 0
```
### User Stories
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-2781

### API Extensions

A new cluster scoped CRD is introduced to support this feature

all the new APIs for the new CRD are defined here https://github.com/openshift/ingress-node-firewall/tree/master/api/v1alpha1

> ### Test Plan

Author: if node rebooted when it come back up all rules will be rebuild and pinned to node bpffs

- Unit tests coverage
- IPv4/IPv6 E2E coverage to validate ingress node firewall functionality on OCP cluster with multiple external traffic streams to match allow and deny actions and verify statistics per rule.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Author: no we do handle that in nodeState controller we have pkg called eBPF sync that does this specific thing

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: Great! Do we have tests for such functionality?

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Author: yes

admin could leave the cluster in unusable state by configuring bad rules to block traffic to api server or drop DNS,
ingress node firewall controller will check and prevent configuration that might impact cluster basic operation.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

N/A

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

Tech Preview: 4.12

#### Tech Preview -> GA

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Author: this is already handled we have logic that merge and purge old rules so we stay in sync wuth the configs

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Reviewer 2: I'm not necessarily taking about the rules in the maps, but the EBPF map definitions themselves, how do we plan to keep the firewall up and running which swapping out the underlying map definitions?

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Author: why would the MAP definition change ? the maps as match up with libebpf in kernel and I don't see this will ever change but if it does that will be require removing and repopulating all the maps again

- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

OCP customers would like to secure OCP's nodes from external DDoS attacks by configuring ingress firewall policies.
eBPF provides very flexible filtering mechansim to allow early detection and filtering for a wide range of protocols IPv4/IPv6/ICMP/TCP/UDP/ICMPv6/SCTP.

New cluster scoped CRD `GolbalNodeFirewall` will be used to configure node ingress firewall match rules and a per matching rule statistics will be avaliable.

## Motivation

Customers would like to protect OCP cluster from external DDoS attacks.

### Goals

- Solution based on using `eBPF` for packet filtering.
- flexiable match filters rules for customer to use with a CRD validation to detect and fail invalid configuration.
- Provide a mechanism for customers to select which nodes via `nodeSelector` and the node's interface(s) where the firewall policy will be attached to.
- Ingress node firewall is deployed on a fully operational OCP cluster (i.e. cluster comes up with no default ingress firewall policy).

> - fail safe in case of user provisioned invalid rules which can lockup cluster operation.

Author: I used an example entries to show how the fail safe rules will be programmed

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

- customers will label nodes where ingress node policy will be deployed on.

> - customers will prepare `GlobalNodeFirewall` object with all required firewall rules and deploy.

Reviewer: Yeah, they won't like that either. Especially, they may want to have multiple objects with a `0.0.0.0/0` CIDR.

Like, one firewall object for "block access to the apiserver" that only applies to the masters, and one for "block weird ICMP packets" that applies to all nodes.

You'll probably need a `priority` field to determine the ordering between them.

(This is partially based on discussions from the `AdminNetworkPolicy` working group... we will definitely want to make this firewall object have a similar "feel" to ANP, in terms of things like `priority`.)

(Current ANP spec is https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-network/2091-admin-network-policy but updates are happening in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api/pull/30 as we nail down the details of the API.)

> - customers will prepare `GlobalNodeFirewall` object with all required firewall rules and deploy.

Author: I prefer using order field much easier from usability since its much more clearer the execution order vs using priority , also would like to introduce nodeendpoint object so we have policy on specified interface and different on others or on all so what about something like this 
- sample NodeEndPoint object
```yaml
kind: NodeEndpoint
metadata:
  name: worker-all-interfaces
  labels:
    role: k8s-worker
spec:
  interfaces: 

---

kind: NodeEndpoint
metadata:
  name: worker-eth0
  labels:
    role: k8s-worker
spec:
  interfaces: 
  - "eth0"

---
```

- sample `IngressNodeFirewall` object

```yaml
kind: IngressNodeFirewall
metadata:
  name: worker-nodes-firewall-on-eth0
  annotations:
    node-endpoint: worker-eth0
spec:
  nodeSelector: has(do-node-ingress-firewall)
  ingress:
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 1.1.1.1/24
       - 100:1::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 10  
      protocol: tcp
      port: 100
      action: allow
    - order: 20
      protocol: udp
      ports: [8000, 8080, 9000]
      action: allow
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 3.3.3.3/24
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: icmp
      type: 3 # Destination unreachable
      code: 1 # Host unreachable
      action: allow
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 10:10::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: icmpv6
      type: 128 # Ping request
      action: deny
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 0.0.0.0/0
       - 0::0/0
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: tcp
      action: allow

---
kind: IngressNodeFirewall
metadata:
  name: worker-nodes-firewall
  annotations:
    node-endpoint: worker-all-interfaces
spec:
  nodeSelector: has(do-node-ingress-firewall)
  ingress:
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 1.1.1.1/24
       - 100:1::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 30
      protocol: udp
      ports: 8000-9000
      action: deny
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 0.0.0.0/0
       - 0::0/0
    rules:
    - order: 20
      protocol: tcp
      action: deny
    - order: 30
      protocol: udp
      action: deny
    - order: 40
      protocol: sctp
      action: deny
```
let me know your thoughts before reworking the APIs

- IngressNodeFW controller will process `GlobalNodeFirewall` events and generate eBPF configuration rules and interfaces in configuration files at a specific location in the kubernetes node filesystem.
- NodeFw's pod will have an initContainer that will load and attach eBPF kernel hook loaded as `BPF_PROG_TYPE_XDP` to the list of interfaces configured in `GlobalNodeFirewall` object.

> - NodeFw's pod manager container will be watching those configuration files and use it to update eBPF ingress table Maps which is shared between userspace and kernel.

Author: true the CNO controller that manage the new CRD can also be the eBPF loader the only reason I originally pulled it out in case we need to explore with bpfd or cilium ebpf didn't want to overwhelm CNO 

so the controller now need to have :
- verification webhook to verify config and do the fail safe checks
- handle CRD add/update/delete
- load/update/delete eBPF table

> - NodeFw's pod manager container will be watching those configuration files and use it to update eBPF ingress table Maps which is shared between userspace and kernel.

Author: I think having separate olm operator give us much more flexibility vs. running in CNO we can bundle api, verification webhook, reconciler, eBPF loader and e2e all together in new d/s repo

- in order to fail safe and avoid cluster lockup, various pinholes will be open in the firewall to allow basic services, the full list of those ports is defined [host-port-registery](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/host-port-registry.md#external) if customer tried to configure ingress firewall against this list config will be rejected.

### Workflow Description

- the following diagram shows how node ingress firewall configuration is handled

![Ingress Firewall configuration processing](./ingress-nodefw-config-flow.png)

- the following diagram shows how eBPF kenrel hook is compiled and how the eBPF loader will attached to the interfaces and update the map table with firewall match rules and actions

![eBPF workflow](./eBPF_workflow.png)

- the following diagram shows eBPF how ingress firewall kernel hook will process packets and apply firewall rules

> ![eBPF workflow](./ebpf-packet-flow.png)

Author: no support for raw match in this release

    __u8 protocol;
    __u32 srcAddr;
    __u32 srcMask;
    __u16 dstPort;
    __u8 icmpType;
    __u8 icmpCode;
    __u8 action;
} __packed;

#define MAX_INSIDE_TARGETS   (1024)
#define MAX_RULES_PER_TARGET (100)

struct bpf_map_def SEC("maps") ingressRulesTbl = {
    .type = BPF_MAP_TYPE_LPM_TRIE,
    .key_size = sizeof(struct bpf_lpm_ip_trie),
    .value_size = sizeof(struct rulesStore) + (sizeof(struct ruleInfo)*MAX_RULES_PER_TARGET),
    .max_entries = MAX_INSIDE_TARGETS,
    .map_flags = BPF_F_NO_PREALLOC,
};

// using Longest perfix match in case of overlapping CIDRs we need to match to the more specific CIDR.
struct bpf_lpm_trie_ip_key {
    __u32 prefixlen;
    union {
        __u8 data[4];
        __u8 data[16];
    } u;
} __packed;

struct rulesStore {
    __u32 numRules;
    struct ruleInfo rulesInfo[0];
} __packed;
```

![eBPF datastructures](./ebpf-structures.png)

### User Stories

#### Story 1

### API Extensions

A new cluster scoped CRD is introduced to support this feature this CRD will be managed by `ClusterNetworkOperator`
```golang
type IngressNodeFirewallFromCIDR struct {
	// FromCIDR is the IPv4/IPv6 CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^(([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])\.){3}([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])/([0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[0-2])$`

Author: I can't find such tag here can you share ?
https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/markers/crd-validation.html#crd-validation

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^(([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])\.){3}([0-9]|[0-9][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|2[0-4][0-9]|25[0-5])/([0-9]|[12][0-9]|3[0-2])$`

Author: I was able to find something like this `// +kubebuilder:validation:one-of[]=Type=string;Format:ipv4;Format:ipv6` however not good for CIDR I posted question kn kubebuilder channel

	FromCIDR string `json:"fromCIDR" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=fromCIDR"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule define ingress node firewall rule per protocol
type IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule struct {
	// Port is the port number to which clients should send traffic to.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=65535
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=1
	Port int32 `json:"port" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=port"`

	// IcmpType define ICMP Type Numbers (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=43
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0

> 	IcmpType int8 `json:"icmpType" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=icmpType"`

Reviewer: should not have a single "rule" type with fields that only apply to specific types. There should be one struct with fields for ICMP matches and one for fields with UDP/TCP/SCTP matches.

Author: something like this ?
```golang
// IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule define ingress node firewall rule for ICMP and ICMPv6 protocols
type IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule struct {
	// ICMPType define ICMP Type Numbers (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=43
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0
	ICMPType int8 `json:"icmpType" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=icmpType"`

	// ICMPCode define ICMP Code ID (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=16
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0
	ICMPCode int8 `json:"icmpCode" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=icmpCode"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule define ingress node firewall rule for TCP, UDP and SCTP protocols
type IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule struct {
	/ Port is the port number to which clients should send traffic to.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=65535
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=1
	Port int32 `json:"port" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=port"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule define ingress node firewall rule per protocol
type IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule struct {
    // IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule define ingress node firewall rule for TCP, UDP and SCTP protocols 
	ProtocolRule IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule json:"protoRule" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=protoRule"`
    
	// IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule define ingress node firewall rule for ICMP and ICMPv6 protocols
    ICMPRule IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule `json:"icmpRule" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=icmpRule"`

	// Protocol can be ICMP, ICMPv6, TCP, SCTP or UDP.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="ICMP";"ICMPv6";"TCP";"UDP";"SCTP"
	Protocol IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType `json:"protocol" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=protocol,casttype=IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType"`

	// Action can be Allow or Deny.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Allow";"Deny"
	Action IngressNodeFirewallActionType `json:"action" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=action,casttype=IngressNodeFirewallActionType"`
}
```

Reviewer: yeah... although that's ugly :slightly_smiling_face:. Need to think about this...

	// IcmpCode define ICMP Code ID (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=16
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0
	IcmpCode int8 `json:"icmpCode" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=icmpCode"`

	// Protocol can be ICMP, ICMPv6, TCP, SCTP or UDP.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="ICMP";"ICMPV6";"TCP";"UDP";"SCTP"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="ICMP";"ICMPv6";"TCP";"UDP";"SCTP"
```

	Protocol IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType `json:"protocol" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=protocol,casttype=IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType"`

> 	// Action can be Allow or Deny.

Reviewer: need to clarify what happens if one rule allows traffic and another denies it. (eg, the first rule takes effect, the last rule takes effect, etc)

Author: rules should be distinct we can't have
```
protocol:
- tcp:
  port: 80
  action: allow
- tcp:
  port: 80
  action: deny
```
validation webhook should reject this config

Author: exactly that is the case we will match the more specific rule otherwise hit the fallback rule if it explicit if not the implicit 0.0.0.0/0 that deny all protocols (ofcourse outside the failsafe rules) will take effect.

	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Allow";"Deny"
	Action IngressNodeFirewallActionType `json:"action" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=action,casttype=IngressNodeFirewallActionType"`
}

// ProtocolType defines the protocol types that are supported
type IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType string

const (
	// ProtocolTypeICMP refers to the ICMP protocol
	ProtocolTypeICMP ProtocolType = "ICMP"

> 	// ProtocolTypeICMPV6 refers to the ICMP protocol
> 	ProtocolTypeICMPV6 ProtocolType = "ICMPV6"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// ProtocolTypeICMPv6 refers to the ICMPv6 protocol
	ProtocolTypeICMPv6 ProtocolType = "ICMPv6"
```

> 	// ProtocolTypeTCP refers to the TCP protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// ProtocolTypeTCP refers to the TCP protocol, for either IPv4 or IPv6
```

etc with the others

type IngressNodeFirewallActionType string

const (
	IngressNodeFirewallAllow IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "Allow"
	DIngressNodeFirewallDeny IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "Deny"
)

// IngressNodeFirewallRules define ingress node firewall rule
type IngressNodeFirewallRules struct {
// FromCIDRS is A list of CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule
FromCIDRs []IngressNodeFirewallFromCIDR `json:"fromCIDRs" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=fromCIDRs"`
// FirewallProtocolRules is A list of per protocol ingress node firewall rules
FirewallProtocolRules []IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule `json:"firewallProtocolRules" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,names=firewallProtocolRules"`
}

// NodeIngressFirewallConfigConfigSpec consists of a node name which the private IP should be assigned to.
// +k8s:openapi-gen=true
type NodeIngressFirewallConfigSpec struct {
	// A list of interfaces where the ingress firewall policy will be applied on.
	// empty list indicates the firewall policy applied on all interfaces
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +optional
	Interface []string `json:"interface" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=interface"`

	// A list of ingress firewall policy rules.

> 	// empty list indicates no ingress firewall i.e allow all incoming traffic.

Reviewer: (This one is fine, because that's actually consistent; if there are 0 rules in the list, then the firewall matches 0 kinds of traffic.)

// status is the observed status of the desired private IP request. Read-only.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
// +optional
Status NodeIngressFirewallConfigStatus `json:"status,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=status"`
}

// Compatibility level 1: Stable within a major release for a minimum of 12 months or 3 minor releases (whichever is longer).
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
// +resource:path=nodeingressfirewallconfig
// NodeIngressFirewallConfigList is the list of NodeIngressFirewallConfigList.
// +openshift:compatibility-gen:level=1
type NodeIngressFirewallConfigList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=metadata"`

	// List of NodeIngressFirewallConfig.
	Items []NodeIngressFirewallConfig `json:"items" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=items"`
}
```

### Test Plan

- Unit tests coverage
- IPv4/IPv6 E2E coverage to validate ingress node firewall functionality on OCP cluster with multiple external traffic streams to match allow and deny actions and verify statistics per rule.

### Risks and Mitigations

> N/A

Reviewer: This would be a good place to talk about the admin getting locked out by bad rules, and what we might do about it

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

- customers will label nodes where ingress node policy will be deployed on.
- customers will prepare `IngressNodeFirewall` objects with all required firewall rules and deploy, rules in each objects need to be distinct, no CIDRs duplication in different objects. 
- IngressNodeFW controller will process `IngressNodeFirewall` objects, making sure configuration doesn't contradict with fail safe rules, update eBPF ingress table and attach eBPF kernel hook loaded as `BPF_PROG_TYPE_XDP` to the list of interfaces configured in `IngressNodeFirewall` object.
- in order to fail safe and avoid cluster lockup, various pinholes will be open in the firewall to allow basic services, the full list of those ports is defined [host-port-registery](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/host-port-registry.md#external) if customer tried to configure ingress firewall against this list config will be rejected.

### Workflow Description

- the following diagram shows how node ingress firewall configuration is handled

![Ingress Firewall configuration processing](./ingress-nodefw-config-flow.png)

> - the following diagram shows how eBPF kenrel hook is compiled and how the eBPF loader will attached to the interfaces and update the map table with firewall match rules and actions

Reviewer 3: s/kenrel/kernel/

---
title: ingress-node-firewall-with-ebpf

authors:
  - "@msherif1234"

reviewers:
  - "@danwinship"
  - "@dave-tucker"
  - "@dcbw"
  - "@trozet"

approvers:
  - "@danwinship"
  - "@knobunc"

api-approvers:
  - "@danwinship"

creation-date: 2022-06-15

last-updated: 2022-06-21

status: implementable

tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SDN-2781
---

# Ingress node Firewall using eBPF

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> OCP customers would like to secure OCP's nodes from external attacks by configuring ingress firewall policies.

Reviewer 4: Right, but a stateless firewall offers only very rudimentary attach prevention,
I'm just curious if there is a customer need to help prevent things like TCP SYN floods at this layer also?

> eBPF provides a very flexible filtering mechansim to allow early detection and filtering.

Reviewer 4: It might be worth calling out here that XDP in particular is where the gain is to be had, since that allows fast dropping after packet has been received but before it's been processed by the network stack.

For customers to take the best advantage of this they will want a NIC that supports XDP in HW or DRV mode.

Author: ok

> New cluster scoped object `IngressNodeFirewall` will be used to configure node ingress firewall match rules and a per matching rule statistics will be avaliable.

Reviewer 4: Have customers asked for, or do we anticipate them asking for rule logging also?

Author: in the form of emitting events for packet drops ? or u mean something else ?

Reviewer 4: yeah, basically [this](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/security_guide/configuring_logging_for_denied_packets) but for your feature.

> Admin can provision multiple instances of this object while ensuring certain excuetion order.

Reviewer 4: typo: execution

Another cluster scoped object `NodeEndpoint` which will be used to specify the attachment interface(s) for example admin can apply specific node firewall rules on one or more interfaces and another different set of rules on another interface(s) or apply the same rules to all interfaces.

## Motivation

Customers would like to secure OCP cluster from external attacks.

### Goals

- flexible match filters rules for customer to use with a CRD validation to detect and fail invalid configuration.
- Provide a mechanism for customers to select which nodes via `nodeSelector`.
- Provide a mechanism to define attachement interfaces for the node ingress firewall objects.  

> - Ingress node firewall is deployed on a fully operational OCP cluster (i.e. cluster comes up with no default ingress firewall policy).

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I follow. Do you mean that if you deploy the firewall on a cluster that it will default to being disabled?
Surely enabled but with the fail-safe rules you call out below might be a safer choice

Author: the default when the cluster is up is no ingress node fw I will rewrite it to make it more clear

- fail safe in case of user provisioned invalid rules which can lockup cluster operation.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

> - customers will provision `NodeEndPoint` objects where the nodeFirewall policy will be applied to, if the list is empty the policy will be applied on all interfaces.

Reviewer 4: I've not set up Ingress on k8s in ages, but I would assume that the Ingress FW config should in some way be related to the Ingress configuration, right?

This might not seem important now but:
1, As an admin, it can be a bit of a pain to keep these 2 disparate configs in sync
2. I would imagine that its **REALLY** important if you were to want to add stateful features in the future. This would be almost impossible if you're in  a setup with asymmetric routing.

Author: from what I see those are completely two different things at the end will impact external traffic to service but they configure different things hence adding @Miciah for his thoughts on this

Author: if u look at others Calico called it `GlobalNetworkPolicy` while Cillium called it `CiliumClusterwideNetworkPolicy` , what do u think about using `GlobalNetworkPolicy` ?

- customers will label nodes where ingress node policy will be deployed on.
- customers will prepare `IngressNodeFirewall` objects with all required firewall rules and deploy, and via annotation will select the `NodeEndPoint` where the policy will be applied to, if there is no annotation rules will be attached to all interfaces.
- IngressNodeFW controller will process `IngressNodeFirewall` objects, making sure configuration doesn't contradict with fail safe rules, update eBPF ingress table and attach eBPF kernel hook loaded as `BPF_PROG_TYPE_XDP` to the list of interfaces configured in `NodeEndPoint` object.
- in order to fail safe and avoid cluster lockup, various pinholes will be open in the firewall to allow basic services.

### Workflow Description

- the following diagram shows how node ingress firewall configuration is handled

![Ingress Firewall configuration processing](./ingress-nodefw-config-flow.png)

- the following diagram shows how eBPF kernel hook is compiled and how the eBPF loader will attached to the interfaces and update the map table with firewall match rules and actions

> ![eBPF workflow](./eBPF_workflow.png)

Reviewer 4: I think this diagram need revising.

1, I am assuming you plan to ship a compiled program as part of your operator that's configured via a map. There are customers that aren't happy with us shipping an LLVM toolchain. That should be reflected in the diagram
2. I would argue that this doesn't really show what is responsible for loading eBPF code or attachment to an interface
3. Neither does it show which component would be updating the maps

Author: i will remove this diag since we have description on who will load the maps and how it will look in kernel in another sections

- the following diagram shows eBPF how ingress firewall kernel hook will process packets and apply firewall rules

> ![eBPF workflow](./ebpf-packet-flow.png)

Reviewer 4: Am I to understand that you have 2 actions:

1. Drop packets that don't match any rule
2. Drop packets that match a rule where action != allow and update stats

If so, I think you should also collect stats for paclets in `1` also

Author: you are right when cluster comes up no fw at all, now once u apply the firewall we will internally prog failSafe rules and if there is no rule for 0.0.0.0/0 we will add one with default deny `action`

- eBPF data structures and types

```c
#define DENY XDP_DROP
#define ALLOW XDP_PASS
#define MAX_DST_PORTS 100
struct ruleInfo {
    __u32 ruleId;
    __u8 protocol;
    __u32 srcAddr;
    __u32 srcMask;
     __u16 dstPort[MAX_DST_PORTS];
    __u8 icmpType;
    __u8 icmpCode;
    __u8 action;
} __packed;

#define MAX_INSIDE_TARGETS   (1024)
#define MAX_RULES_PER_TARGET (100)

struct bpf_map_def SEC("maps") ingressRulesTbl = {
    .type = BPF_MAP_TYPE_LPM_TRIE,
    .key_size = sizeof(struct bpf_lpm_ip_trie),
    .value_size = sizeof(struct rulesStore) + (sizeof(struct ruleInfo)*MAX_RULES_PER_TARGET),
    .max_entries = MAX_INSIDE_TARGETS,
    .map_flags = BPF_F_NO_PREALLOC,
};

// using Longest perfix match in case of overlapping CIDRs we need to match to the more specific CIDR.
struct bpf_lpm_trie_ip_key {
    __u32 prefixlen;
    union {
        __u8 data[4];
        __u8 data[16];
    } u;
} __packed;

> struct rulesStore {

Author: very good point will look at `BPF_MAP_TYPE_PERCPU_ARRAY` and `BPF_MAP_TYPE_PERCPU_HASH` options

    __u32 numRules;
    struct ruleInfo rulesInfo[0];
} __packed;
```

![eBPF datastructures](./ebpf-structures.png)

> 

Reviewer 4: You mention updating stats earlier, but I don't see any design details on how you plan to manage:

1. Updating stats from eBPF (which will need to be done percpu to avoid synchronization issues)
2. Counter behaviour - is it going to wrap around when you hit u64::MAX?
2. Reading map counters into userspace: assume polling?

type IngressNodeFirewallActionType string

const (
	IngressNodeFirewallAllow IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "allow"
	IngressNodeFirewallDeny  IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "deny"
)

// IngressNodeFirewallRules define ingress node firewall rule
type IngressNodeFirewallRules struct {
	// FromCIDRS is A list of CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule
	// +kubebuilder:validation:one-of[]=Type=string;Format:cidr
	FromCIDRs []string `json:"fromCIDRs"`
	// FirewallProtocolRules is A list of per protocol ingress node firewall rules
	FirewallProtocolRules []IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule `json:"rules"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallSpec defines the desired state of IngressNodeFirewall
type IngressNodeFirewallSpec struct {
	// Selects node(s) where ingress firewall rules will be applied to
	// +optional
	NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

	// A list of ingress firewall policy rules.
	// empty list indicates no ingress firewall i.e allow all incoming traffic.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +optional
	Ingress []IngressNodeFirewallRules `json:"ingress"`

	// A list of interfaces where the ingress firewall policy will be applied on.

> 	// empty list indicates the firewall policy applied on all interfaces

Reviewer 5: What is meant by all interfaces? Veths included? I don't think that is what we want.

- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

OCP customers would like to secure OCP's nodes from external attacks by configuring ingress firewall policies.
eBPF provides a very flexible filtering mechansim to allow early detection and filtering.
eXpress Data Path (XDP) is a feature in the Linux kernel which allows users to execute a user-supplied eBPF program when a packet is received on a network interface (NIC). 
This program is executed in the NIC’s device driver, right after the interrupt processing and before the network stack. 
The goal of XDP is to offer comparable performance to kernel bypass solutions while working with the existing kernel networking stack.
New cluster scoped object `IngressNodeFirewall` will be used to configure node ingress firewall match rules and a per matching rule statistics will be avaliable.
Admin can provision multiple instances of this object while ensuring certain execution order.

> Another cluster scoped object `NodeEndpoint` which will be used to specify the attachment interface(s) for example admin can apply specific node firewall rules on one or more interfaces and another different set of rules on another interface(s) or apply the same rules to all interfaces.

Author: I am combine both configs back in single object to make things simpler

For the best performance XDP programs need to attach to interfaces using the following models:

> - Native XDP

Author: we have nothing to do with this right, did platform specifics the above was more or less informative, the mode will determined based on NIC driver and all of this abstracted from us

  The XDP program is loaded by the network card driver as part of its initial receive path. This also requires support from the network card driver.
- Offloaded XDP
  The XDP program loads directly on the NIC, and executes without using the CPU. This requires support from the network interface device.

## Motivation

> Customers would like to secure OCP cluster from external attacks.

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to be narrowed down... If the ask is this wide, I simple "node firewall" is too narrow of a solution.  

This motivation makes me think that users really wan't to apply policy to all possible means of ingressing a cluster.  Such an object would need to be implemented across the CNI and Ingress engine to be feasible. 

I just don't want us to spend the time making an OCP specific object for customers just for them to eventually come back and say "we need more"

Author: @astoycos this is already solved prob with other vendors both Calico and Cillium have similar approach for node protection and this is just a gap for OCP , so while we are trying to fill in this gap we trying to make the api flexibile as much as we can

Reviewer 2: Right but in Cilium's case they simply extend their cluster wide network policy via a nodelabel selector https://docs.cilium.io/en/v1.9/gettingstarted/host-firewall/ 

And Calico does something similar https://projectcalico.docs.tigera.io/security/protect-hosts 

Really what i'm trying to say, it doesn't seem right to have a dedicated API object with a single use case ... i.e node firewalling... 

Since once we let ANY API object out of the box we will be stuck with it for many many releases 

Why not look at following the same schema used by cilium and Calico... I.e We have a cluster wide policy object in the new [AdminNetworkPolicy API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/network-policy-api) And we could work together with upstream so simply add N/S traffic support + a nodeselector  

Sorry If I'm being pedantic here @msherif1234 I just think API design is one of the most important parts here, and IMO the more APIs we can share with the upstream community the easier it will be for CU's and users in general

Author: we did look at both implementation, also it was mentioned ANP earlier we decided to decouple them at least for this release specially that early phases on ANP is just for intercluster traffic unlike what we need to do here when that matures we can see possible leverage in the future, I agree API design is very critical piece that is why we put too much effort defining it, also this downstream only project

### Goals

- flexible match filters rules for customer to use with a CRD validation to detect and fail invalid configuration.
- Provide a mechanism for customers to select which nodes via `nodeSelector`.
- Provide a mechanism to define attachement interfaces for the node ingress firewall objects.  
- Ingress node firewall is deployed on a fully operational OCP cluster (i.e. cluster comes up with no default ingress firewall policy).
- fail safe in case of user provisioned invalid rules which can lockup cluster operation.

### Non-Goals
- Flood Attacks

## Proposal

> - customers will provision `NodeEndPoint` objects where the nodeFirewall policy will be applied to, if the list is empty the policy will be applied on all interfaces.

Author: I am getting rid of this object and have it part of the rules itself it makes things much easier

- customers will label nodes where ingress node policy will be deployed on.

> - customers will prepare `IngressNodeFirewall` objects with all required firewall rules and deploy, and via annotation will select the `NodeEndPoint` where the policy will be applied to, if there is no annotation rules will be attached to all interfaces.

Reviewer 2: + 1 What's the reason for straying away from label selectors here?

- IngressNodeFW controller will process `IngressNodeFirewall` objects, making sure configuration doesn't contradict with fail safe rules, update eBPF ingress table and attach eBPF kernel hook loaded as `BPF_PROG_TYPE_XDP` to the list of interfaces configured in `NodeEndPoint` object.

> - in order to fail safe and avoid cluster lockup, various pinholes will be open in the firewall to allow basic services.

Reviewer 2: Are these explicitly defined by the cluster admin? Or is it done internally in OCP whenever a new object is created?

### Workflow Description

- the following diagram shows how node ingress firewall configuration is handled

![Ingress Firewall configuration processing](./ingress-nodefw-config-flow.png)

- the following diagram shows eBPF how ingress firewall kernel hook will process packets and apply firewall rules

> ![eBPF workflow](./ebpf-packet-flow.png)

Author: there will be default `0.0.0.0/0` entry with default action `deny`

- the following table shows sample of fail safe rules to make sure users won't block basic cluster services by configuring invalid firewall rules

| Source CIDR | Protocol | Port | Purpose |
|-------------|----------|------|---------|
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    |  22  |  SSH    |
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   UDP    |  68  | DHCP    |
|  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    | 6443 | Kubernetes API server access |

> |  0.0.0.0/0  |   TCP    | 2380 & 2379 | Etcd access |

Reviewer 6: What about the network plugin's ports? (such as for geneve, vxlan). Should the failsafe include communication to/from other cluster nodes?

Reviewer 2: Again are these handled internally or managed by OCP?

Author: failsafe rules only cover criticial cluster operations TCP and UDP ports like API server, etcd , any other type of ports we assume admin need to know what he is doing or we can easily extend our rules list to cover any critical ports as needed

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> New downstream OLM operator (openshift/ingress-nodefw-operator) will be designed to do the following:-

Author: operator is coupled to the feature regardless if its done via ebpf or not that is internal

- APIs for the new objecs.
- controller for each of the new resources to handle add/update/delete
- verification webhook to validate the configuration.  
- library to construct and load eBPF ingess maps tables based on the provisioned rules.
- library for statistics collection and exporting to prometheus.

New downstream repo for the kernel hook implementation (openshift/ingress-nodefw-kernel)

> - sample `NodeEndPoint` object

Reviewer 6: nit: NodeEndpoint

```yaml
kind: NodeEndpoint
metadata:
  name: worker-all-interfaces
  labels:
    role: k8s-worker
spec:

>   interfaces: 

Reviewer 6: The NodeEndpoint with an empty list of interfaces is not needed (and should be invalid), because if the nodeSelector of an IngressNodeFirewall does not match the label on any NodeEndpoint, then all interfaces will be selected. So remove that from this example?

---

kind: NodeEndpoint
metadata:
  name: worker-eth0
  labels:

>     role: k8s-worker

Reviewer 6: An IngressNodeFirewall object applies to a node selector? And then a NodeEndpoint modifies which interfaces this applies to? Doesn't the NodeEndpoint then have to have a nodeSelector, too? Or how does the NodeEndpoint select the node to apply to?

spec:
  interfaces: 
  - "eth0"

---
```

- sample `IngressNodeFirewall` object

```yaml
kind: IngressNodeFirewall
metadata:
  name: worker-nodes-firewall-on-eth0
  annotations:
    node-endpoint: worker-eth0
spec:
  nodeSelector: has(do-node-ingress-firewall)
  ingress:
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 1.1.1.1/24
       - 100:1::1/64
    rules:

>     - order: 10  

Reviewer 6: make this "priority"

Author: priority has some confusion to it is low value higher or lower priority why order is more easier to understand rules execution will be done in ascending order

      protocol: tcp
      ports: [100]
      action: allow
    - order: 20
      protocol: udp
      ports: [8000, 8080, 9000]
      action: allow
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 3.3.3.3/24
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: icmp
      type: 3 # Destination unreachable
      code: 1 # Host unreachable
      action: allow
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 10:10::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: icmpv6
      type: 128 # Ping request
      action: deny
  - fromCIDRS:
       - 0.0.0.0/0
       - 0::0/0
    rules:
    - order: 10
      protocol: tcp
      action: allow

---

kind: IngressNodeFirewall
metadata:
  name: worker-nodes-firewall
  annotations:
    node-endpoint: worker-all-interfaces
spec:
  nodeSelector: has(do-node-ingress-firewall)
  ingress:

>   - fromCIDRS:

Reviewer 6: I would find it more logical to have the fromCIDRs as part of the rule, and make rule a top level object underneath ingress:
~~~
ingress:
  - priority: 30
    protocol: udp
    ports:
      - 8000 - 9000
      - 9999
    fromCIDRS:
      - 1.1.1.0/24
         192.0.2.0/24
    action: deny
~~~

Author: I arrange that way because for the same CIDR u can have many rules specially the dp is key is the cidr to get to rules list

       - 1.1.1.1/24
       - 100:1::1/64
    rules:
    - order: 30
      protocol: udp
      ports: 8000-9000
      action: deny

>   - fromCIDRS:

Reviewer 6: make this source?

       - 0.0.0.0/0
       - 0::0/0
    rules:
    - order: 20
      protocol: tcp
      action: deny
    - order: 30
      protocol: udp
      action: deny
    - order: 40
      protocol: sctp
      action: deny
```

> In case of multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` on the same nodes and interfaces if the CIDR matches or overlap the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be excuted first, once the rule is excuted and action is taken firewall operation will be completed, all the following rules won't be checked. 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In the case that there are multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` objects for the same nodes and interfaces with overlapping CIDRs, the `order` field will specify which rule applies first: lower order will be executed first, and once a rule is executed and an action is taken, the firewall operation will be complete, and all the following rules won't be checked. 
```

> In case of multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` on the same nodes and interfaces if the CIDR matches or overlap the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be excuted first, once the rule is excuted and action is taken firewall operation will be completed, all the following rules won't be checked. 

Reviewer 6: I'd stick to longest prefix match first, then the order / priority as a tie breaker if several rules match the same prefix

> In case of multiple `IngressNodeFirewall` on the same nodes and interfaces if the CIDR matches or overlap the `order` field will specify which rule applied first, lower order will be excuted first, once the rule is excuted and action is taken firewall operation will be completed, all the following rules won't be checked. 

Reviewer 6: I'd rather follow iptables model: order all rules according to their priority/order. And if a rule does not match a packet, then go to the next rule, until one rule matches.  That way, the oder/priority is the most important factor and it's also easier to implement, I think.

We could also match based on longest prefix and use the order as a tie breaker, but that gives the user less flexibility.

Question:
What happens if both CIDR / order overlap? Longest prefix match first?
What happens if CIDR / longest-prefix / order overlap? Random rule applies first?

struct bpf_lpm_trie_ip_key {
    __u32 prefixlen;
    union {
        __u8 data[4];
        __u8 data[16];
    } u;
} __packed;

struct rulesStore {
    __u32 numRules;
    struct ruleInfo rulesInfo[0];
} __packed;
```

- eBPF statistics

Implementation will use perf events map 
```c
struct bpf_map_def SEC("maps") rule_stats_map = {
        .type		= BPF_MAP_TYPE_PERF_EVENT_ARRAY,
        .key_size	= sizeof(int),
        .value_size	= sizeof(struct ruleStatistics),
        .max_entries	= MAX_CPUS,
};

struct ruleStatistics {
    __u64 pkts;
    __u64 bytes;
} __packed;
```

the key will be the ruleId and if we need to capture the packet's header for a specific rule we just need
to modify the flags setting to factor in how many bytes from the packet's header we need to capture for example :-

```
#define MAX_HEADER_SIZE 512
__u64 flags = BPF_F_CURRENT_CPU;

flags |= (__u64)MAX_HEADER_SIZE << 32;
```
### User Stories

- Design ingress node Firewall CRD and APIs.

- Design and Implement ingress node firewall CNO controller to manage new CRD "reconciler" . 
  
- Implement eBPF tabels loader and attach to the selected interfaces.

> - Implement implicit firewall pinholes rules to allow fail safe in case of invalid configuration (user shoudln't try to overwrite those rules).

Author: fail safe rules are fixed "hardcoded" set of rules once we configure the policy those rules will auto magically get applied verification webhook will reject any attempt to have a config overlap with those failsafe rules

> - Implement eBPF tabels loader and attach to the selected interfaces.
> 
> - Implement implicit firewall pinholes rules to allow fail safe in case of invalid configuration (user shoudln't try to overwrite those rules).
> 
> - Implement verification webhook to validate configuration and protect against invalid rules.
>   
> - Create Ingress node eBPF OCP repro.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Implement eBPF tables loader and attach to the selected interfaces.

- Implement implicit firewall pinholes rules to allow fail safe in case of invalid configuration (user shouldn't try to overwrite those rules).

- Implement verification webhook to validate configuration and protect against invalid rules.
  
- Create Ingress node eBPF OCP repo.
```

I think that's supposed to be "repo" as in "repository", not "repro", right?

Author: right

- Implement and build Ingress node eBPF kernel hook to do ingress node firewall.

- Ingress node firewall E2E testing.

### API Extensions

> A new cluster scoped CRD is introduced to support this feature this CRD will be managed by `ClusterNetworkOperator`

Author: no CNO in the mix here ?

```golang
type IngressNodeFirewallFromCIDR struct {

> 	// FromCIDR is the IPv4/IPv6 CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	// fromCIDR is the IPv4/IPv6 CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule
```
https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/api-conventions.md#use-json-field-names-in-godoc

The idea is that the rule matches if the source address is in `fromCIDR`, right?  I'm tempted to suggest naming the field `sourceCIDR`, or even `sourceAddressRange` (like the Service API's `loadBalancerSourceRanges` field).

Author: we will have more time to review API this is just skelton to show the APIs at high level

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:one-of[]=Type=string;Format:ipv4;Format:ipv6

Reviewer 7: Do `Format:ipv4` and `Format:ipv6` actually allow CIDRs?  Based on <https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/blob/bd7662a3abd0450ed3c8c09843d1d256284b15f2/vendor/k8s.io/kube-openapi/pkg/validation/strfmt/default.go#L158-L165>, I think you want `Format:cidr`.

Author: I tried Format:cidr doesn't seem to add any validation ?

	FromCIDR string `json:"fromCIDR" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=fromCIDR"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule define ingress node firewall rule for ICMP and ICMPv6 protocols
type IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule struct {
	// ICMPType define ICMP Type Numbers (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=43
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0
	ICMPType int8 `json:"icmpType" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=icmpType"`

	// ICMPCode define ICMP Code ID (RFC 792).
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=16
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=0
	ICMPCode int8 `json:"icmpCode" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=icmpCode"`
}

// IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule define ingress node firewall rule for TCP, UDP and SCTP protocols
type IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule struct {

>     // start-end range of dstPorts or [port1, port2,..., portn].

Reviewer 7: What happens if this is empty?  The godoc should describe the behavior.

    // +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
    // +optional

>     Ports []int32 `json:"ports" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=ports"`

Reviewer 7: You should have min and max values.  To do this with a slice, you might need to define a new type and specify min and max on the type:
```go
// Port is a TCP, UDP, or SCTP port number.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Minimum:=1
// +kubebuilder:validation:Maximum:=65535
type Port int32

type IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule struct {
    // [...]
    Ports []Port `json:"ports" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=ports"`
```

Author: I am going with single port per protocol ran into issues with XDP code having nested loops will add it to none-goal and see how people will react to it

}

// IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule define ingress node firewall rule per protocol
type IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule struct {
    // IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule define ingress node firewall rule for TCP, UDP and SCTP protocols.
	ProtocolRule IngressNodeFirewallProtoRule json:"protoRule" protobuf:"varint,1,opt,name=protoRule"`
    
	// IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule define ingress node firewall rule for ICMP and ICMPv6 protocols.
    ICMPRule IngressNodeFirewallICMPRule

	// Protocol can be ICMP, ICMPv6, TCP, SCTP or UDP.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="ICMP";"ICMPv6";"TCP";"UDP";"SCTP"
	Protocol IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType

	// Action can be Allow or Deny.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Allow";"Deny"
	Action IngressNodeFirewallActionType `json:"action" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=action,casttype=IngressNodeFirewallActionType"`
}

> // ProtocolType defines the protocol types that are supported
> type IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType string

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
// IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType defines the protocol types that are supported
type IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType string
```
Looks like you need to change `ProtocolType` to `IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType` below too (or change `IngressNodeFirewallRuleProtocolType` to `ProtocolType` here).

Author: yeah fixed that during PoC

const (
	// ProtocolTypeICMP refers to the ICMP protocol
	ProtocolTypeICMP ProtocolType = "ICMP"

	// ProtocolTypeICMPv6 refers to the ICMPv6 protocol
	ProtocolTypeICMPv6 ProtocolType = "ICMPv6"

	// ProtocolTypeTCP refers to the TCP protocol, for either IPv4 or IPv6
	ProtocolTypeTCP ProtocolType = "TCP"

	// ProtocolTypeUDP refers to the UDP protocol, for either IPv4 or IPv6
	ProtocolTypeUDP ProtocolType = "UDP"

	// ProtocolTypeSCTP refers to the SCTP protocol, for either IPv4 or IPv6
	ProtocolTypeSCTP ProtocolType = "SCTP"
)

// IngressNodeFirewallActionType indicates whether an IngressNodeFirewallRule allows or denies traffic

> // +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^Allow|Deny$`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^(Allow|Deny)$`
```
Or simpler:
```suggestion
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Allow";"Deny"
```
But this is superfluous anyway because you already specify validation on the API field that uses this type.

type IngressNodeFirewallActionType string

const (
	IngressNodeFirewallAllow IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "Allow"
	DIngressNodeFirewallDeny IngressNodeFirewallActionType = "Deny"
)

// IngressNodeFirewallRules define ingress node firewall rule
type IngressNodeFirewallRules struct {
// FromCIDRS is A list of CIDR from which we apply node firewall rule
FromCIDRs []IngressNodeFirewallFromCIDR `json:"fromCIDRs" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=fromCIDRs"`
// FirewallProtocolRules is A list of per protocol ingress node firewall rules

> FirewallProtocolRules []IngressNodeFirewallProtocolRule `json:"firewallProtocolRules" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,names=firewallProtocolRules"`

Reviewer 7: The godoc should describe the behavior when these fields are empty.

}

// NodeIngressFirewallConfigConfigSpec consists of a node's ingress firewall rules
// +k8s:openapi-gen=true
type NodeIngressFirewallConfigSpec struct {
	// A list of ingress firewall policy rules.
	// empty list indicates no ingress firewall i.e allow all incoming traffic.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +optional
	Ingress []IngressNodeFirewallRules `json:"ingress" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=ingress"`
}

// NodeEndPointConfigSpec consists of list of interfaces where ingress node firewall policy will be attached to
// +k8s:openapi-gen=true
type NodeEndPointConfigSpec struct {
	// A list of interfaces where the ingress firewall policy will be applied on.
	// empty list indicates the firewall policy applied on all interfaces
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems:=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:UniqueItems:=true
	// +optional
    // +nullable

> 	Interface *[]string `json:"interface" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=interface"`

Reviewer 7: Does this need to be a pointer type?  what is the difference between nil and empty?

Author: in case u don't specific any interfaces at all in the spec so we will have null pointer while empty list still hold some memory but len is 0

}

```

### Test Plan

- Unit tests coverage
- IPv4/IPv6 E2E coverage to validate ingress node firewall functionality on OCP cluster with multiple external traffic streams to match allow and deny actions and verify statistics per rule.

### Risks and Mitigations

> admin could leave the cluster in unusable state by configuring bad rules to block traffic to api server or drop DNS,

Reviewer 2: EBPF's effects on other core dataplane components seems like a fairly lager risk here as well

Author: why would there be any impact on core dataplane with eBPF ?

Reviewer 2: Since we're accessing data before iptables and other datapaths we could break certain expected traffic patterns (I know this is just a firewall drop/allow but using EBPF for traffic verdicts in general is a risk in my opinion)

Author: till we try out we won't know we minimize the risk by using fail open i.e we allow if we don't know so we will have no impact to traffic patterns we didn't anticipate

ingress node firewall controller will check and prevent configuration that might impact cluster basic operation.

### Drawbacks

N/A

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 6: What framework shall we use? kubebuilder, operatorsdk, or just a copy of the sample controller? Do we have a standard within Red Hat? Because so far, I see some projects use the sample controller, others use operatorsdk

Author: `operator-sdk`

> 

Reviewer 5: Can we define what the webhook will do?

Author: ok
